.TH MIDICOPY 1
.SH NAME
midicopy \- Copy selected track, channel, time interval of a MIDI file to another MIDI file
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmidicopy\fP [\fB-ver\fP] [\fB-trks\fP \fIn1,n2,..\fP]\
    [\fB-xtrks\fP \fIn1,n2,..\fP]\
    [\fB-xchns\fP \fIn1,n2,..\fP]\
    [\fB-chans\fP \fIn1,n2,...\fP]\
    [\fB-from\fP \fIn (in midi ticks)\fP] [\fB-to\fP \fIn (in midi ticks)\fP]\
    [\fB-fromsec %f\fP \fIn (in seconds)\fP] [\fB-tosec\fP \fIn (in seconds)\fP]\
    [\fB-frombeat %f\fP \fIn (in beats)\fP] [\fB-tobeat\fP \fIn (in beats)\fP]\
    [\fB-replace\fP \fItrk,loc,val\fP] [\fB-tempo %n\fP] [\fB-speed %f\fP]\
    [\fB-drumfocus\fP \fIn \fIm\fP] [\fB-mutenodrum [%d]\fP]\
    [\fB-setdrumloudness\fP \fIn \fIm\fP]\
    [\fB-focusontrack\fP \fIn1,n2,... (from 1)\fP]\
    [\fB-focusonchannel\fP \fIn1,n2,... (from 1)\fP]\
    [\fB-attenuation\fP \fIn\fP]\
    [\fB-nobends\fP]\
    [\fB-indrums\fP \fIn1,n2,...\fP]\
    [\fB-xdrums\fP \fIn1,n2,...\fP]\
    [\fB-onlydrums\fP]\
    [\fB-nodrums\fP]\
 \fIinput.mid output.mid\fP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
.B midicopy
is used to copy part of a MIDI file to another MIDI file. You can select
a particular time interval, particular channels, and particular tracks
or any combinations. If one or both of the run time parameters \-from or \-to
are included, the program returns the playing time in seconds of the
output file.  Midicopy was developed by Seymour Shlien from the
midifilelib distribution available from
.IR http://www.harmony-central.com/MIDI/midifilelib.tar.gz .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -ver
prints version number and then exits
.TP
.B -trks n1,n2, etc
Selects the tracks to be copied where the track numbers start
from 1.  If more than one track is specified, they should be separated by
commas. You should always copy track 1 since by convention it contains
information pertinent to all the other  tracks. By default all tracks
are copied unless you specify particular tracks using this run time
parameter.
.TP
.B -xtrks n1,n2, etc
Lists the tracks to exclude from copying. All other tracks are copied.
This option does not work in combination with \-trks.
.TP
.B -xchns n1,n2, etc
Lists the channels to exclude from copying. All other channels are copied.
This option does not work in combination with \-chns.
.TP
.B -chns n
Like above, it specifies the MIDI channels to be copied. By default
all channels are copied. Channel numbers also start from 1.
.TP
.B -from n
The program will copy all MIDI commands starting from midi pulse
number n. By default it will start from time zero or the beginning
of the MIDI file.
.TP
.B -to n
Stops copying all events after midi pulse number n. By default
the file is copied to the end.
.TP
.B -frombeat n
The program will copy all MIDI commands starting from quarter beat
number n. By default it will start from time zero or the beginning
of the MIDI file.
.TP
.B -tobeat n
Stops copying all events after quarter beat number n. By default
the file is copied to the end.
.TP
.B -fromsec n
The program will copy all MIDI commands starting from time n 
in seconds.
.TP
.B -tosec n
Stops copying all events after time n in seconds. These two
options (\-fromsec and \-tosec) do not work accurately if the
MIDI file has more than one tempo command. Only the first
one is used for converting seconds into MIDI pulse units.
It is therefore preferable to use the \-from and \-to options.
.TP
.B -replace trk,loc,val
This option should be used alone. Midicopy will copy the entire
file verbatim except it will replace a byte by val, where the
byte is located in the specified track (trk) and specified position
(loc). Commonly this function is used for changing a particular
MIDI program number (instrument) associated with a channel.
You need to know the byte count in the track of that parameter
in order to use this function,
.TP
.B -tempo quarter notes/minute
All tempo indications in the midi file will be replaced with
the above value.
.TP
.B -speed factor
All tempo indications in the midi file will be multiplied with
this factor. Values greater than 1.0 will speed up the music while
lower values slow the music. The factor is a floating point value.
.TP
.B -drumfocus drum-code excluded_drum_velocities
The selected drum line (specified by the drum-code pitch value) is
highlighted by reducing the loudness of all other drum lines to
the excluded_drum_velocities value. The drum-code value must
be in the range of 35 to 81 inclusive.
.TP
.B -mutenodrum [level]
All channels which are not 9 (drum channel) are attenuated to the
given level. If level is not specified, it is assumed to be zero.
.TP
.B -setdrumloudness n m
where n is between 35 to 81 inclusive and m is the loudness between
0 and 127. The loudness of all instances of drum n are changed
to m.
.TP
.B -focusontrack n1,n2,...
The velocities of notes in all tracks except n are attenuated.
.TP
.B -focusonchannel n1,n2,...
The velocities of notes in all channels except n are attenuated.
.TP
.B -attenuation n
Specifies the amount the note velocities are reduced by either
-focusontracks or -focusonchannels. Current default is 70. 
.TP
.B -nobends
Suppresses all channel pitchbend commands.
.TP
.B -indrums  n1,n2,...
Only allow percussions with codes n1,n2,...
.TP
.B -xdrums  n1,n2,...
Exclude the percussions with codes n1,n2,...
.TP
.B -onlydrums
Only copy the percussion channel.
.TP
.B -nodrums
Copy all channels except the percussion channel.

.SH EXAMPLE
.B midicopy.exe -trks 1,5 -from 2669 -to 8634 uzicko.mid fragment.mid
Midicopy will copy tracks 1 and 5 starting from midi pulse position
2669 and ending at MIDI pulse position 8634.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
.IR abcmtex "(1), " abc2abc "(1), " abc2midi "(1), " midi2abc "(1) ", yaps "(1)"
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Seymour Shlien.
.SH VERSION
This man page describes midicopy version 1.33 from December 22 2019.
